Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent
byGaganendra NathBiswas
Masters Dissertation
Submitted in partial fulfilment for the degree of
MSc. in Artificial Intelligence
Supervised byDr. DavidRobb
Heriot-W att University
School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences
21st July 2026
The copyright in this dissertation is owned by the author. Any quotation
from the dissertation or use of any of the information contained in it must
acknowledge it as the source of the quotation or information.
Authorship Declaration
Course code and name F21MP - Masters Project and Dissertation
Type of assessment Individual
Coursework title Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent
Student name Gaganendra NathBiswas
Student ID H00510018
By signing this form:
• I declare that the work I have submitted for individual assessment or the work I
have contributed to a group assessment is entirely my own. I have not taken the
ideas, writings or inventions of another person and used them as if they were
my own. My submission or my contribution to a group submission is expressed
in my own words. Any uses made within this work of the ideas, writings or
inventions of others, or of any existing sources of information (books, journals,
websites, etc.) are properly acknowledged and listed in the references and/or
acknowledgements sections.
• I confirm that I have read, understood and followed the University’s Regulations
on academic misconduct as published on the University’s website, and that I
am aware of the penalties that I will face should I not adhere to the University
Regulations.
• I confirm that I have read, understood and avoided the different types of plagiarism
explained in the University guidance on Academic Integrity and Plagiarism.
Student signature: Gaganendra NathBiswas
Date: 21st July 2026
Your work will not be marked if a signed copy of this form is not included with
your submission.
i
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Dr. David Robb, for his
invaluable guidance, insightful feedback, and unwavering support throughout this re-
search. I would also like to thank all my professors for their teaching, and guidance, which
have greatly contributed to my academic development. I am also deeply grateful to my
grandfather, whose constant encouragement and support have made my academic journey
possible.
ii
Abstract
In recent years, conversational agents (CAs) have been widely used across various sectors,
including healthcare, education, virtual assistance, and customer service. As CAs become in-
creasingly important in daily life, it is essential for them to evolve and adapt their responses
based on users’ emotional states. Despite this importance, many existing conversational
agents primarily focus on task completion and lack emotional awareness. Although sig-
nificant progress has been made in Speech Emotion Recognition (SER), the integration of
emotion recognition systems with conversational agents to generate emotionally aware re-
sponses remains an under-explored area. Furthermore, most emotion-aware conversational
agents have not been evaluated through human evaluation in live conversational settings.
This study proposes a multi-modal causal emotion classifier developed using a Graph
Attention Network (GAT) that utilizes both audio and text modalities to detect users’
emotions during live conversations. The proposed classifier achieved a weighted F1-score
of 61.26% on MELD and 65.42%/76.51% on the IEMOCAP 6-class/4-class tasks, respectively.
For cross-linguistic comparison, the classifier trained on the IEMOCAP 4-class task was
evaluated on the Berlin EmoDB dataset and achieved a weighted F1-score of 45.6%. The
proposed model has 0.3M trainable parameters and is ˜95% smaller in size than some of
the recently published models while maintaining comparable performance. For human
evaluation, the classifier was coupled with the gemini-2.5-flash model to create an emotion-
aware conversational agent (ECA) capable of generating empathetic responses. A non-
emotion-aware conversational agent (NECA) was also implemented using the same gemini-
2.5-flash model, with emotional awareness disabled through prompt engineering, to enable
a fair comparison. Compared with the NECA, the proposed ECA achieved significantly
higher user satisfaction on the PARADISE scale and tended to receive higher empathy
ratings on the PETS scale. The human evaluation methodology used in this study can be
applied in future research to compare conversational agents in terms of user satisfaction
and perceived empathy.
iii
Table of Contents
Authorship Declaration i
Acknowledgements ii
Abstract iii
Table of Contents iv
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Aims and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.3 Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.4 Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2 Literature review 3
2.1 Importance of emotions in conversational agents . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 The psychological models of emotions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.3 Graph neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.4 Multimodal emotion recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.5 Emotion recognition in conversation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Methodology 5
4 Experimental results & analysis 5
5 Conclusion & future work 5
References 6
A Project Management 8
A.1 Gantt Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
B Generative AI 8
iv
Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent•1
1 Introduction
Emotionally driven conversations not only enhance user satisfaction and engagement
(Loveys et al. 2022, Lutfi et al. 2013) but also play a crucial role in shaping human decision-
making processes (Younis et al. 2024). Therefore, it is essential for CAs to recognise emotions
and generate empathetic responses to improve user experience and increase satisfaction.
(Melo et al. 2010, Peng et al. 2026, Saffaryazdi et al. 2026)
1.1 Background and motivation
Emotionally attuned conversational agents are often used in mental health applications,
hate-speech detection, opinion mining, social media, customer services and others (Ma-
jumder et al. 2019, Pan et al. 2026, Tiwari et al. 2025). In recent years, the Emotion Detection
and Recognition (EDR) market has expanded significantly and is projected to reach USD
52.86 million by 2026 (Geetha et al. 2024). This rapid growth has been accompanied by
increased research efforts aimed at improving the recognition of user’s emotions in hu-
man–computer interaction. However, despite recent advancements in this field, relatively
little attention has been given to the modalities most widely used by conversational agents,
namely speech and text, which account for only 4% of the total research conducted on
multi-modal emotion recognition (MER) systems (Geetha et al. 2024).
Emotions are expressed not only through words but also via vocal features and facial
expressions which contains important emotional cues. In the past, emotion recognition in
conversation approaches relied mainly on textual data (Pan et al. 2026). Furthermore, many
existing emotion recognition classifiers focus mainly on detecting the emotional state of the
user and doesn’t explore the possibilities of using this information to generate appropriate
or empathetic responses. As a result, the integration of emotion recognition with response
generation remains an under-explored area of research (Wang et al. 2024). In addition, there
has been no known research of cross-generalisation of speech emotion classifiers. This is
a critical challenge in practical application of deep learning methods, where a network
struggles to predict on an unknown dataset (Zhang, Huang, Zhang, Zhuang, Han, Lai &
Liu 2024). Therefore, this study introduces an emotionally intelligent conversational agent
that uses the combined information of textual and audio data to detect the emotional state
of the user and generate empathetic responses. Furthermore, this study also evaluates the
cross-generalisation ability of the proposed emotion classifier by training it on one dataset
and testing it on a different dataset including dataset in different language. This study also
focuses on the development of deployable and responsible AI, exploring techniques to
make the system lightweight and ethical.
1.2 Aims and objectives
The aim of this study is to develop and evaluate an ECA that can adapt its responses based on
the perceived emotional state (PES) of the user during live conversation. It also contributes
to the broader field of affective computing by analysing the impact of emotionally intelligent
CAs on user satisfaction. Furthermore, the proposed classifier is evaluated to determine its
cross-linguistic generalisability.
2•Gaganendra NathBiswas
The objectives of this study were as follows:
(1) To develop a fully streaming (causal) emotion classifier capable of recognising the
perceived emotional state (PES) of the user in real time.
(2) To perform an automatic evaluation of the proposed emotion classifier using standard
classification metrics.
(3) To evaluate the cross-linguistic generalisability of the emotion classifier by training
it on the IEMOCAP (English) dataset and evaluating it on the EmoDB (German)
dataset.
(4) To integrate the emotion classifier with the Gemini 2.5 Flash large language model
(LLM) to develop an emotion-aware conversational agent capable of generating
empathetic responses based on the user’s perceived emotional state.
(5) To conduct a human evaluation of the emotion-aware conversational agent to assess
user satisfaction and perceived empathy.
1.3 Research questions
This study is guided by the following research questions:
RQ1: Can emotion-aware conversational agents improve user satisfaction during live
conversation?
RQ2: Can emotion-aware conversational agents support users’ in coping with an
emotional situation?
RQ3: Can a Speech Emotion Recognition (SER) model train on a dataset containing
only one language effectively recognise emotions in a dataset from a different
language?
Based on the research questions presented above, this study proposes the following
hypotheses. These hypotheses aim to evaluate whether an emotion-aware conversational
agent (ECA) improves user satisfaction and whether a emotion classifier trained on an
English dataset can generalise to a dataset in a different language (German).
(1)Hypothesis for RQ1:
•H 0:ECA does not significantly improves user satisfaction than NECA.
•H 1:ECA significantly improves user satisfaction than NECA.
(2)Hypothesis for RQ2:
• H10:ECA does not provide significantly higher levels of emotional support to
users compared to NECA.
• H11:ECA provides significantly higher levels of emotional support to users
compared to NECA.
(3)Hypothesis for RQ3:
• H0:An emotion classifier trained on an English dataset performs significantly
worse than the baseline 1 when tested on a different language dataset.
• H1:An emotion classifier trained on an English dataset does not perform
significantly worse than the baseline when tested on a different language dataset.
1Here, the baseline refers to the classifier trained and tested on the same dataset.
Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent•3
1.4 Organisation
Following the introduction, this study is further structured into four more sections:
Literature review: Review of existing research in the field of emotional conversa-
tional agents, psychological emotional models, and emotional classifiers. It also
identifies current research gaps that are relevant to the problem domain of this
study.
Methodology: Provides information related to model development and implementa-
tion, and data sources used in this study.
Experimental results & analysis: Outlines the experimental procedure, reports quan-
titive and qualitative results, and critically analyses the findings.
Conclusion & future work: Summarises the key findings of the study and discusses
potential directions for future research.
2 Literature review
2.1 Importance of emotions in conversational agents
According to Martınez-Miranda & Aldea (2005), emotion is an important component
that makes intelligent systems more human. They further stated that human behaviour,
performance and decision-making are largely influenced by emotions. Bilquise et al. (2022)
in their work found that users often anthropomorphise conversational agents and get
frustrated over apathetic or irrelevant responses from the agent. Thus, developing an
emotion-aware conversational agent is crucial for improved user satisfaction. Their study
further reveals several research gaps such as understanding the user’s emotional state
from past utterances and encourage further conversation, lack of gold-standard emotional
datasets and development of task-oriented emotion-aware conversational agents which can
support the user in accomplishing a task. This study addresses two of the aforementioned
research gaps. It proposes a emotion classifier that takes into account the past utterances of
the user while predicting the current emotional state of the user. This study also develops
an emotion-aware conversational agent using the proposed classifier and evaluates the
final system in a live conversation setting involving human participants.
2.2 The psychological models of emotions
The existing models of emotions are commonly divided into two distinct categories: cate-
gorical models and dimensional models (Chutia & Baruah 2024). Categorical models use
discrete labels to classify emotions into categories whereas dimensional models represent
each emotion as vector in a multi-dimensional space (Deng & Ren 2021). Among these
broad categories of emotion models the most commonly used are Ekman’s basic emotion
model (Ekman 1992), Russell’s circumplex model of emotions (Russell 1980) and Plutchik’s
wheel of emotions (Plutchik 1980), displayed in figure 1. Ekman’s basic emotion model cat-
egorises emotions into six distinct labels which are anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness,
and surprise (Ekman et al. 1999). The circumplex model of emotions is a two-dimensional
emotional spatial model that uses valence and arousal as perpendicular axes dividing the
4•Gaganendra NathBiswas
emotions into four sections. Plutchik, in his work Plutchik (2001), found that the primary
emotions can be structured like a color wheel where the similar emotions are placed
together and opposites are placed far apart. He further introduces a third dimension to
represent the intensity of each emotions which resulted in a conical structured emotion
model.
Fig. 1. Emotion models. A: Ekman’s six basic emotions (Ekman et al. 1999, Shen et al. 2020), B:
Russell’s circumplex model of emotion (Russell 1980) and C: Plutchik’s wheel of emotions (Plutchik
2001)
Many researchers in psychology argue to use dimensional models over categorical to
measure burnout and productivity and to properly explore the cognitive mental states
(Atmaja & Akagi 2020). However, according to Poria et al. (2019), most existing datasets for
emotion recognition in conversations uses categorical labels which are modified versions
of Ekman’s six basic emotions. Consequently, in machine learning, most research has been
conducted using categorical labels due to the lack of datasets that carries dimensional
labels (Vonikakis et al. 2021). In this study, the categorical model of emotions is being
used to facilitate comparison and benchmarking with existing emotion recognition models.
Furthermore, the datasets used in this research primarily contains categorical labels for
emotions and lack dimensional labels. The only exception is the Interactive Emotional
Dyadic Motion Capture (IEMOCAP) described in Busso et al. (2008), which contains both
categorical and dimensional labels.
2.3 Graph neural networks
In many real-world applications data is represented as graphs to effectively capture re-
lationship among entities (Li et al. 2023). Consequently, graph based models are often
used in emotion recognition for their ability to correlate multiple modalities and learn
rich emotional features (Fu et al. 2024). According to Zhou et al. (2020), graph neural net-
works (GNNs) are neural networks that operate on graph-structured data by propagating
information between the nodes. Furthermore, various types of GNNs such as graph convo-
lutional network (GCN), graph attention network (GAT), graph recurrent network (GRN)
have achieved significant performance across a variety of deep learning tasks (Zhou et al.
Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent•5
2020). In recent years, GCNs have been widely used in domains such as natural language
processing, computer vision and recommendation systems (Wang et al. 2023). GCNs has
the ability to perform convolution operations on graph-structured data using the learned
representation of neighbouring nodes to iteratively update each node (Yang et al. 2025).
GCN can be divided into spectral and non-spectral approaches (Hu, Liu, Zhao & Jin 2021,
Veličković et al. 2017). Spectral approaches uses graph Fourier transform based on Laplace
spectral decomposition theory whereas the non-spectral approaches directly performs
convolutions on the graph by aggregating information from neighbouring nodes.
Veličković et al. (2017) in their work proposes GAT, a graph-based self-attention network
which addresses many issues of spectral based approaches while achieving or matching
state-of-the-art performances across various benchmarks.
This work leverages GAT as the backbone of its emotion classification model.
2.4 Multimodal emotion recognition
Human emotions are expressed through a variety of verbal and non-verbal channels,
including speech, visuals, text, and other forms of communication (Zhang, Yang, Chen,
Zhang, Leng & Zhao 2024). In previous researches, the emotional intelligence (EI) of CAs
have been enhanced using text-based sentiment analysis and emotion-adaptive response
generation but vocal cues containing rich emotional contexts have been largely overlooked
(Hu, Huang, Hu & Xu 2021). In machine learning, a multimodal approach is used to combine
information from different modalities and has become an active research area across many
domains (Li et al. 2023). A multimodal emotion classifier fuses data from different modalities
to attain greater accuracy and more robust performance (Al-Azani & El-Alfy 2025). As
discussed in Section 1.1, although speech and text are the most widely used modalities by
conversational agents, they have received relatively little research attention. Therefore, the
proposed classifier in this study takes a multimodal approach combining speech and text
modalities for emotion recognition.
2.5 Emotion recognition in conversation
According to Pan et al. (2026), during a conversation each utterance depends on the previous
utterances, the responses to those utterances and the overall context of the conversation.
Therefore, emotion recognition in conversation (ERC) not only focuses on individual
utterances but also takes into account the overall conversational context and the prior
emotional state of the user to classify the current emotional state (Pan et al. 2026). As a
result, many existing emotion recognition systems leverages contextual information for
emotion classification.
3 Methodology
4 Experimental results & analysis
5 Conclusion & future work
6•Gaganendra NathBiswas
References
Al-Azani, S. & El-Alfy, E.-S. M. (2025), ‘A review and critical analysis of multimodal datasets for emotional ai’,
Artificial Intelligence Review58(10), 334.
Atmaja, B. T. & Akagi, M. (2020), ‘Dimensional speech emotion recognition from speech features and word
embeddings by using multitask learning’,APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing9, e17.
Bilquise, G., Ibrahim, S. & Shaalan, K. (2022), ‘Emotionally intelligent chatbots: A systematic literature review’,
Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies2022(1), 9601630.
Busso, C., Bulut, M., Lee, C.-C., Kazemzadeh, A., Mower, E., Kim, S., Chang, J. N., Lee, S. & Narayanan, S. S.
(2008), ‘Iemocap: Interactive emotional dyadic motion capture database’,Language resources and evaluation
42(4), 335–359.
Chutia, T. & Baruah, N. (2024), ‘A review on emotion detection by using deep learning techniques’,Artificial
Intelligence Review57(8), 203.
Deng, J. & Ren, F. (2021), ‘A survey of textual emotion recognition and its challenges’,IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing14(1), 49–67.
Ekman, P. (1992), ‘Are there basic emotions?’.
Ekman, P., Dalgleish, T. & Power, M. (1999), ‘Basic emotions’,San Francisco, USA1.
Fu, R., Gai, X., Al-Absi, A. A., Al-Absi, M. A., Alam, M., Li, Y., Jiang, M. & Wang, X. (2024), ‘Mm dialoguegat—a
fusion graph attention network for emotion recognition using multi-model system’,IEEE Access12, 150941–
150952.
Geetha, A. V., Mala, T., Priyanka, D. & Uma, E. (2024), ‘Multimodal emotion recognition with deep learning:
Advancements, challenges, and future directions’,Information Fusion105, 102218.
URL:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1566253523005341
Hu, J., Huang, Y., Hu, X. & Xu, Y. (2021), Enhancing the perceived emotional intelligence of conversational
agents through acoustic cues,in‘Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems’, pp. 1–7.
Hu, J., Liu, Y., Zhao, J. & Jin, Q. (2021), Mmgcn: Multimodal fusion via deep graph convolution network for
emotion recognition in conversation,in‘Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 1: Long Papers)’, pp. 5666–5675.
Li, J., Wang, X., Lv, G. & Zeng, Z. (2023), ‘Graphmft: A graph network based multimodal fusion technique for
emotion recognition in conversation’,Neurocomputing550, 126427.
Loveys, K., Sagar, M., Billinghurst, M., Saffaryazdi, N. & Broadbent, E. (2022), Exploring empathy with digital
humans,in‘2022 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user interfaces abstracts and workshops
(VRW)’, IEEE, pp. 233–237.
Lutfi, S. L., Fernández-Martínez, F., Lorenzo-Trueba, J., Barra-Chicote, R. & Montero, J. M. (2013), ‘I feel you:
the design and evaluation of a domotic affect-sensitive spoken conversational agent’,Sensors13(8), 10519–
10538.
Majumder, N., Poria, S., Hazarika, D., Mihalcea, R., Gelbukh, A. & Cambria, E. (2019), Dialoguernn: An
attentive rnn for emotion detection in conversations,in‘Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
intelligence’, Vol. 33, pp. 6818–6825.
Martınez-Miranda, J. & Aldea, A. (2005), ‘Emotions in human and artificial intelligence’,Computers in human
behavior21(2), 323–341.
Melo, C. M. D., Carnevale, P. & Gratch, J. (2010), ‘The influence of emotions in embodied agents on human
decision-making’,Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelli-
gence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)6356 LNAI, 357–370.
URL:https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-15892-6 38
Pan, R., García-Díaz, J. A. & Valencia-García, R. (2026), ‘A dynamic multimodal causal graph framework for
standardized emotion recognition in conversations’,Computer Standards & Interfacesp. 104130.
Emotion-Aware Conversational Agent•7
Peng, X., Qian, Y. & He, Y. (2026), ‘When ai chatbots understand emotions: exploring the mechanisms of
self-disclosure from emotional arousal to psychological acceptance—a hybrid sem–ann–nca analysis across
multiple interaction configurations’,Frontiers in Psychology16, 1724313.
Plutchik, R. (1980), A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion,in‘Theories of emotion’, Elsevier,
pp. 3–33.
Plutchik, R. (2001), ‘The nature of emotions: Human emotions have deep evolutionary roots, a fact that may
explain their complexity and provide tools for clinical practice’,American scientist89(4), 344–350.
Poria, S., Majumder, N., Mihalcea, R. & Hovy, E. (2019), ‘Emotion recognition in conversation: Research
challenges, datasets, and recent advances’,IEEE access7, 100943–100953.
Russell, J. A. (1980), ‘A circumplex model of affect. ’,Journal of personality and social psychology39(6), 1161.
Saffaryazdi, N., Gunasekaran, T. S., Loveys, K., Broadbent, E. & Billinghurst, M. (2026), ‘Empathetic conversa-
tional agents: Utilizing neural and physiological signals for enhanced empathetic interactions’,International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction42(6), 4555–4579.
Shen, G., Wang, X., Duan, X., Li, H. & Zhu, W. (2020), Memor: A dataset for multimodal emotion reasoning in
videos,in‘Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia’, pp. 493–502.
Tiwari, A., Panicker, M. D., Singh, Y. K. & Kaliyar, R. K. (2025), Emotionally intelligent chatbots: Enhancing
human-machine interaction using bert transformer,in‘2025 6th International Conference on Control,
Communication and Computing (ICCC)’, IEEE, pp. 1–6.
Veličković, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P. & Bengio, Y. (2017), ‘Graph attention networks’,
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903.
Vonikakis, V., Dexter, N. Y. R. & Winkler, S. (2021), Morphset: Augmenting categorical emotion datasets
with dimensional affect labels using face morphing,in‘2021 IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing (ICIP)’, IEEE, pp. 2713–2717.
Wang, B., Dong, G., Zhao, Y., Li, R., Cao, Q., Hu, K. & Jiang, D. (2023), ‘Hierarchically stacked graph convolution
for emotion recognition in conversation’,Knowledge-Based Systems263, 110285.
Wang, X., Liu, T., Liu, Z. & Fang, Z. (2024), ‘Empci: Empathetic response generation with common sense and
empathetic intent’,Cognitive Systems Research88, 101267.
Yang, J., Wei, P., Du, X. & Shen, J. (2025), ‘Graph attention based on contextual reasoning and emotion-shift
awareness for emotion recognition in conversations’,Complex & Intelligent Systems11(7), 287.
Younis, E. M., Mohsen, S., Houssein, E. H. & Ibrahim, O. A. S. (2024), ‘Machine learning for human emotion
recognition: a comprehensive review’,Springer36, 8901–8947.
URL:https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00521-024-09426-2
Zhang, S., Yang, Y., Chen, C., Zhang, X., Leng, Q. & Zhao, X. (2024), ‘Deep learning-based multimodal emotion
recognition from audio, visual, and text modalities: A systematic review of recent advancements and
future prospects’,Expert Systems with Applications237, 121692.
Zhang, X., Huang, H., Zhang, D., Zhuang, S., Han, S., Lai, P. & Liu, H. (2024), ‘Cross-dataset generalization in
deep learning’,arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11207.
Zhou, J., Cui, G., Hu, S., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Li, C. & Sun, M. (2020), ‘Graph neural networks:
A review of methods and applications’,AI open1, 57–81.
8•Gaganendra NathBiswas
A Project Management
A.1 Gantt Chart
B Generative AI